RESERVES NOW USED TO SUPPLY GAUTENG WITH WATER 07 NOVEMBER 2016 The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS), this morning began the process of releasing water from the country’s reserves at Sterkfontein Dam into the Vaal Dam. The release is necessitated by the low dam level of the Vaal Dam that is due to the drought and the high evaporation as a result of high temperatures. The water will flow from the Sterkfontein Dam into the Nuwejaarspruit, then into the Wilge River which will then feed the Vaal. The release of the water from the reserve storage as the Sterkfontein Dam is, forms part of the process of managing the dam level at the Vaal to stay at or above 25% of capacity. This process is envisaged to be over 54 days till the end of December. The release this morning allowed for the volume at 20 cubic metres per second, which will rise incrementally to reach its peak of 70 cubic metres per second at the beginning of December. This process will then taper off back to the initial 20 cubic metres per second towards the end of December when the release will be ended. In total the release will allow for a maximum of 200 million cubic metres to have been released at the end of the envisaged 54 days. All this water is meant to replenish the Vaal and therefore all those along the waterways of the Nuwejaarspruit, the Wilge and the Vaal are reminded not to engage in any illegal activities like unauthorised abstraction or diversion of the resource. Whilst this activity will bring some stability to the Vaal dam, the reality of the drought should be realized. The need to continue water conservation and the wise use of water remains. South Africa is a water scarce country, ranked as the 39th driest country in the world; that is drought-stricken at the moment. All water users are encouraged to adhere to water restrictions. Municipalities will continue to enforce adherence to the restrictions according to their bylaws and where necessary take appropriate action. Statement issued by the Department of Water and Sanitation, 7 November 2016