ANCKZN CONCERNED AT THE MYSTERIOUS KILLING OF ITS COUNCILLOR ON THE LOWER SOUTH COAST REGION 11 November 2016 The African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal is shocked and saddened by the brutal murder of one of its activist, Cde Thembinkosi “Commando” Zoleka. Cde Zoleka was assassinated at his residence in Margate on the South Coast last night (Thursday). Cde Zoleka, 47, was a member of the ANC Lower South Coast Region, REC Working Committee member and a Proportional Representation councillor in the Ray Nkonyeni Municipality. At this stage, details regarding Cde Zoleka’s murder remain sketchy but it appears that he was attacked in his sleep when the assassin gained entrance in the house through the window. He was shot while his wife and children were in dining room studying and suspect used the same window to escape. His wife crawled on her knees to their bedroom to inform Cde Zoleka about the shooting but find him dead. The passing away of Cde Zoleka will leave a void in the ranks of the ANC, the Alliance and the mass democratic movement in general, that will not be easy to fill. “In him, we have lost a dedicated comrade, a father and a true revolutionary who served our community with dedication. His outstanding leadership skills will be sadly missed by many in the ANC, especially who benefited from his unparalleled wisdom. “We are shocked and outraged by a mysterious murder of Cde Zoleka and we find his murder as an act of viciousness. We dip our banner in honour of this fallen cadre of our revolution and commit ourselves to pick up his spear and soldier on with the struggle for the betterment of our people’s lives which he waged until his last moments,” said ANC Provincial Secretary, Cde Super Zuma. Cde Zuma urged members of the public to assist police with the information that could lead to the arrest of the assassins. “We as the ANC believe that the murder of people would come to an end when communities work together with the police. A loss of one person regardless a political affiliation is one too many. We do not want to see any murder of the any person in our province.” The ANC extend its heartfelt condolences to Cde Zoleka family, comrades and friends. “We would like to assure them that we are with them during this sad moment of bereavement. We share their grave sense of loss.” At present, the ANC cannot rule out a political motive in the shooting Cde Zoleka. Statement issued by Mdumiseni Ntuli, ANC KZN Provincial Spokesperson, 11 November 2016