Parliament's failure to pass division of Revenue Bill 17 November 2016 The weekly meeting of the African National Congress Parliamentary Caucus met today and comprehensively reflected on the unfortunate events of the past two days regarding the failure by the National Assembly to quorate to pass the crucial Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. The Bill is critical to the government's ability to continue fulfilling its service delivery obligations to South Africans, and Parliament's delay in passing it means the allocation of revenue to various government departments will not occur as planned. When parliamentarians dither on such critical decisions, the lives of ordinary South Africans are affected and the ability of the institution to improve the material conditions of the people is eroded. The failure to pass this type of draft legislation is a serious indictment on all parties in Parliament. Be that as it may, the ANC - as the Majority Party, takes full responsibility for this development. Granted, the duty to ensure the quorum of Members to take part during Parliament decision-making processes rests with all parties in the true spirit of participative democracy. However, the ANC - with its overwhelming mandate it received from the electorate - does not require favours from the very same parties that are against transformation of our socio-economic conditions and against improving the lives of the poor majority of people of our country. With its significant majority, which the very same parties often dare us to use unilaterally on certain matters, but later accuse us of abusing it on others when it doesn't suit their agenda, the ANC alone, is and always has been, well-positioned to pass decisions and improve people's lives. The last two sittings were declared three-line whip (compulsory attendance) sittings. Regarding this past Wednesday's sitting, the ANC had 209 MPs who had individually confirmed attendance, we were thus confident the Bill would be passed. The rest of the MPs, 40 of them, were granted leave of absence due to their Parliamentary and executive international commitments, committee oversight, ill health and critical personal matters. In this regard, the ANC Caucus meeting today expressed its dismay and grave disappointment regarding the two failed successive attempts in ensuring a quorum of Members to pass the Bill due to certain ANC MPs' absence from the House in the last two days. The absence of these MPs, despite recorded confirmation that they will be present, is disgraceful and downright disrespectful to the people of South Africa. The unanimous view of the Caucus is that the harshest punishment must be taken against the absentees. The Caucus meeting has therefore directed that the names of these MPs be immediately forwarded to the Caucus Disciplinary Committee (CDC), which must formally charge each of these MPs and initiate a disciplinary hearing without delay. The CDC is a constituted by five members and is chaired by Advocate Mathole Motshekga. The extreme seriousness of the charges faced by these MPs requires that the process be conducted swiftly. This will ensure that the appropriate sanctions possible are meted out against the delinquent MPs to send a strong message to all and sundry that we are unwavering in our commitment to enforce diligence, unwavering presence in the House and committees, and an attitude of respect and accountability towards the electorate. The public deserves representatives that take their parliamentary tasks seriously and demonstrate commitment to serve. Recently, the ANC Caucus Lekgotla resolved that any MPs found to have repeatedly absconded or violated the code of conduct must be recommended to the ANC for their immediate recall from Parliament. MPs who repeatedly demonstrate scant regard for the duties entrusted to them by the electorate must make way for those who are prepared to serve with dedication. The failure to pass a draft legislation on two consecutive occasions is unprecedented, and therefore requires the highest sanction. Parliament's failure to pass the Division of Revenue Bill will also impact on the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), as its programme will have to be extended by at least a week - resulting in unnecessary additional expenditure for the institution. The ANC will ensure that the Bill is rescheduled during the course of next week, during which no MP, including members of the executive, would be granted leave of absence. Issued by Moloto Mothapo on behalf of the Office of the ANC Chief Whip, 17 November 2016