ANC statement on 2015/2016 AG report 17 November 2016 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the marginal improvement in the audit outcomes of public entities as well as provincial and national government departments reported by the Auditor General of South Africa (AGSA) yesterday, 16 November 2016. We are particularly pleased by the improvement in the number of clean audits from 122 to 152 during the period under review, demonstrating commitment by government to sound financial management, clean and accountable governance and the prudent management of the public purse. Notwithstanding these successes, the African National Congress calls for greater consequence management for those organs of state which continue to post qualified and adverse audit findings; demonstrating general apathy to the required standards of financial and performance management. To this end, the ANC will be calling on all its deployees in government with such findings, particularly the repeat offenders, to account on the failure to demonstrate adequate controls in the management of public funds. The Auditor General of South Africa is a Chapter 9 institution established to support and strengthen constitutional democracy. Its findings and directives, such as any other Chapter 9 institution, have legal effect and should be binding. Greater consequence management must be implemented and the remedial actions proposed by the Auditor General must be more directly aligned to performance management within government departments, ensuring corrective action can be taken in the case of non-compliance. Fit-for-purpose, qualified and competent people must be placed in positions of responsibility across our state institutions. It is only when we stringently apply the law, have strong internal controls and give due regard to the recommendations of the AGSA that we may decisively deal fruitless and wasteful, irregular and unauthorised expenditure which, if left unattended, become pathways to corruption, maladministration and unethical behaviour. The ANC congratulates the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng provinces for having the biggest improvement in audit outcomes over a 3 year period. These improvements are testament to the difference that can and should still made where the requisite leadership and management focus and committed is present. Issued by Zizi Kodwa, National Spokesperson, 17 November 2016