City devastated by the news of the death of valued employee, Steven Otter 16 December 2016 It is with shock and great sadness that we learnt of the devastating news of Transport for Cape Town (TCT) employee, Steven Otter who was murdered during burglary at his Harfield Village home in the early hours of this morning. Otter, 43 had been working for the City as the Head of Community Engagement in TCT for the past two and a half years and previously worked as Mayor De Lille’s spokesman in the Independent Democrats. Mayor De Lille fondly referred to Otter as “Stevovo” or “my pavement special” in reference to his eccentric nature. Otter, a former journalist was well known in media circles and left an indelible mark in many people’s lives. As the City as the Head of Community Engagement in TCT, Otter was tasked with keeping communities informed and involved in MYCiTi and roads projects. “No matter what he did, his work was always excellent and the plight of the vulnerable was always close to his heart. We are truly devastated by the news,” Councillor Brett Herron said. Otter found his niche in TCT and was always focussed on ensuring a fair outcome for the most vulnerable and marginalised in every TCT project he was involved in. Councillor Herron added: “It will be impossible to replace the kind of passion, care and commitment he displayed.” Otter was instrumental in a number of breakthroughs in TCT, most recently in the longstanding impasse over the upgrade of roads in Imizamo Yethu which had been delayed for decades due to community resistance. Otter knocked on every resident’s door to ask the community to work with the City to do the road upgrades. “He really unlocked a project that was blocked for many years,” Herron said. “I have known and worked with dear Stevovo for many years and he was truly a one of a kind person whose dedication was certainly one of his greatest traits. He will be sorely missed. We extend our deepest condolences to his ex-wife Janine Lange and their young daughter, Mya, 6, family, colleagues and friends. You are in our thoughts and prayers during this difficult time,” Mayor De Lille said. Issued by Zara Nicholson, Spokesperson for the Executive Mayor Patricia de Lille, 16 December 2016