Text of Stellenbosch University’s draft revised Admissions Policy for implementation from 1 January 2017 (closing dates for comments 31 October 2016) STELLENBOSCH UNIVERSITY Document reference  HEMIS classification  Document type Draft: Revised Admissions Policy Policy aim The aim of this policy is to stipulate principles, guidelines and provisions in respect of admission to undergraduate and postgraduate programmes of Stellenbosch University. Approval date 28 November 2016 Implementation date  Revision schedule At least every five years, or sooner as needed Previous revisions  Policy owner Vice-Rector: Learning and Teaching Policy curator Senior Director: Prospective Students Approved by Council Operative version English Keywords admissions policy; management guidelines; admission and selection guidelines; academic excellence; diversity; disadvantage; redress; inclusivity; equality of rights; social responsibility; socio-economic status; educational disadvantage; economic disadvantage; weighted disadvantage factor; first-generation student; race; self- classification; extended degree programmes; multilingualism; ownership; curator Table of contents Essence of the policy 1. Introduction 2. Aim of policy 3. Scope of policy 4. Policy objectives 5. Policy principles 6. Policy provisions 6.1 Overview of the Admissions Process 6.2 Admissions Requirements 6.3 Determining Enrolment Targets 6.4 Admission Procedure 6.5 Race 6.6 Socio-economic status (SES) 6.7 Extended Degree Programmes 6.8 No unfair discrimination 6.9 Students with special learning needs (disabilities) 6.10 Scarce skills 6.11 Prior learning experience 6.12 International students 6.13 Admission and language 6.14 Students with criminal records 6.15 Student access with success 7. Policy control 8. Monitoring and reporting 9. Action in the event of non- compliance 10. Definitions 11. Supporting documents 12. Related documents ADDENDUM A The essence of the Policy This Admissions Policy supports SU’s strategic positioning for the 21st century set out in the current Institutional Intent and Strategy 2013-2018, which commits the University to creating and sustaining “an environment of inclusivity, transformation, innovation, diversity, and maintaining excellence with a focus on the future”. The Admissions Policy promotes access and success for students from diverse communities. Stellenbosch University (SU) commits itself to an equitable, transparent and reasonable process for admission to undergraduate and postgraduate programmes. The policy is mindful of the multifaceted and complex nature of disadvantage in the South African context. It therefore considers a range of factors in the admission of students in order to enable SU to help eliminate inequalities and discrimination in the higher education system. The ultimate aims of the policy are to admit a diverse student body with the potential to succeed and to maintain and promote academic excellence through diversity. 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 This Policy gives effect to SU’s obligations arising from the Constitutional right of access to higher education, and the legislative duty to ensure that its admissions policy provides “appropriate measures for the redress of past inequalities and may not unfairly discriminate in any way”. 1.2 As a public higher education institution, SU is also contributing to the achievement of national objectives for higher education, including the increase of the participation rate in higher education in South Africa. 1.3 SU must play its part in the pursuit of academic excellence within society at large. 1.4 SU must also conduct its teaching and research so as to contribute to the elimination of inequalities and discrimination in the higher education system, including the effects of past inequalities and discrimination. 1.5 SU is therefore committed to fulfil its responsibility in respect of redress in the country. 1.6 The SU Council determines certain student diversity targets to facilitate redress and to give effect to the vision of SU, namely to be an inclusive, innovative and future-focused university. 1.7 In light of the above, SU requires a nuanced set of indicators against which to consider the admission of a diverse group of newcomer students to the University with the potential for success. 2. AIM OF POLICY The aim of this policy is to stipulate principles, provisions and guidelines in respect of admission to undergraduate programmes and, where applicable, to postgraduate programmes at SU. 3. SCOPE OF POLICY 3.1 This policy informs admission to undergraduate programmes, while the underlying principles of the policy also apply to admission to postgraduate programmes. 3.2 This policy does not apply to short courses. Admission to short courses is informed by the Policy in respect of the Presentation of Short Courses. 3.3 This policy also does not apply to the procedures for readmission after unsuccessful studies. Readmission is informed by the Readmissions Policy. 4. POLICY OBJECTIVES This policy has the following objectives: 4.1 Establishing an equitable, transparent and reasonable process for admission to undergraduate and postgraduate programmes. 4.2 Contributing to the creation of an inclusive student community, where diversity is regarded as an asset. 4.3 Attracting and admitting academically excellent students. 4.4 Admitting prospective students who have the potential to graduate successfully and to be well-equipped thought leaders for the future. 4.5 Offering equal opportunities to prospective students who are equally situated and facilitating redress where individuals or categories of people were or still are disadvantaged due to past unfair discrimination. 4.6 Providing a framework within which faculties must draft their guidelines and procedures for faculty-specific admissions and selection for undergraduate and, where applicable, postgraduate programmes. 5. POLICY PRINCIPLES 5.1 The University follows a learning, teaching and development approach that offers promising students the opportunity to achieve academic success and develop the SU graduate attributes. 5.2 The University is committed to both academic excellence, and increasing the numbers of Black African, Coloured and Indian (BCI) and socio-economically disadvantaged students. These two factors must work in tandem, and not in competition. It is thus important for the University to attract both the best candidates, regardless of race, the best BCI candidates and the best candidates with lower socio-economic status (SES). Accordingly, decisions on admission are aligned with the principles of academic excellence through diversity and inclusivity. 5.3 The University must be satisfied that any applicant, regardless of race or SES, has the ability to successfully complete a course of study to which he or she is seeking admission. 5.4 The minimum requirements for a course of study are based on the experience of each faculty. They are aimed at ensuring that every prospective student has the ability to complete a course of study, without lowering the standards of teaching and assessment. 5.5 Marks attained at school, particularly in subjects relevant to a chosen course of study, are the best predictor of the capacity of candidates to successfully complete that course of study. The minimum requirements are thus principally based on subject choices at school and the marks attained, although some weight may also be attributed to other factors deemed important indicators of possible success by the faculty. 5.6 The University recognises the disparities between its existing student body, compared to the pool of candidates qualifying with university exemption from high schools, and the demographic make-up of the Western Cape region and the country. 5.7 The University is committed to affirmative action measures, with the specific aim of overcoming the long-term effects of apartheid and racial division, evidenced by those disparities. 5.8 In implementing an affirmative action plan, for the time being the University will use a generic definition of Black students, which gives equal advantage to all BCI students (i.e. for the time being no sub-group of Black African students will be given any additional advantage compared to Coloured or Indian students). There may be exceptions, such as in Medicine and Health Sciences, in which preference is given to Black African and Coloured applicants to reflect national and regional demographics. 5.9 The University bases its determination of an applicant’s race on the honest self- classification by applicants. Should the University believe that a disparity appears from the information available to the University about the applicant’s self-classification, the University reserves the right to reassess the self-classification. 5.10 The University aims to at least achieve the demographic representation targets it sets annually in conjunction with the DHET, or a higher target taking into account the demographic make-up of the pool of candidates qualifying for study in a particular course. 5.11 The University also recognises the need to reserve places for socio-economically disadvantaged students, regardless of race, who achieve the minimum requirements for a chosen course of study, but who would not otherwise be admitted to that course of study. Based on the current socio-economic realities of South Africa, most of these students are likely to be BCI applicants, but this may change over time. 5.12 The Policy, and the targets set in each year, will be adapted to reflect the progress made at the University and in the wider community, at eradicating the effects of apartheid and racial division. The objective of the Policy must be to achieve a situation in which redress is no longer required. 5.13 The University is committed to eradicating unfair discrimination on all grounds which impair persons in their fundamental human dignity. 6. POLICY PROVISIONS 6.1 OVERVIEW OF THE ADMISSION PROCESS Admissions to SU occur as follows: 6.1.1 Determination of Admissions Targets: 6.1.1.1 The Council annually determines targets for the University based on the size (total number of students) and shape (fields of study and diversity profile) of its student body (para 6.3). 6.1.1.2 Each faculty determines the number of places, and the minimum admission criteria for each programme (para 6.3). 6.1.1.3 order to redress historical disadvantage and achieve a diverse student body, each faculty determines aspirational targets for the number of BCI students, and the number of socio-economically disadvantaged students it aims to admit in each programme (para 6.4). 6.1.1.4 order to meet those targets, each faculty assigns a number of the available places per programme for admission to students in the following categories: 6.1.1.4.1 Applicants’ prior academic performance, regardless of race or socio- economic disadvantage; 6.1.1.4.2 Best performing BCI applicants; and 6.1.1.4.3 Best performing Socio-economically disadvantaged applicants. 6.1.2 Analysing the Applicant Pool: 6.1.2.1 For each programme, the faculty identifies those applicants that meet the minimum admission requirements and ranks them according to their academic performance at school level. 6.1.2.2 Based on the application data supplied, the faculty determines the race (para 6.5) and SES score (para 6.6) of each applicant. 6.1.2.3 Depending on the composition of the applicant pool for that particular year, a faculty may adjust the number of places assigned on the basis of race and SES. It may do so only if, having regard to that year’s applicant pool, an adjustment is necessary to achieve an appropriate balance between admitting academically excellent students, redressing past discrimination, and admitting a diverse student body. 6.1.3 Admitting students (see para 6.2 and Table 2 in Addendum A) 6.1.3.1 The faculty admits the highest ranked applicants in accordance with their academic results at school to fill the places assigned for academic achievement without regard to race or SES. 6.1.3.2 Thereafter the faculty admits the highest ranked BCI and SES applicants until the respective targets for each category have been met. 6.1.3.3 If there are still places remaining, the best performing applicants, will be admitted without regard to race or SES status. 6.1.3.4 Those BCI and SES applicants who are not admitted to a mainstream programme, including applicants who do not meet the minimum requirements for admission, may be considered for admission to an Extended Degree Programme (para 6.7). 6.2 ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 6.2.1 The University subscribes to and follows the statutory admission requirements stipulated by the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) for degree, diploma and higher certificate programmes.’ 6.2.2 SU does not prescribe general, university-wide minimum admission requirements. 6.2.3 Faculties annually determine minimum admission criteria for each programme that must be approved by the Senate. These criteria may include both academic performance and other relevant factors. 6.2.4 In setting the minimum admission criteria, faculties must: 6.2.4.1 Aim to admit only those applicants who can successfully complete the course; 6.2.4.2 Rely primarily on historical data demonstrating the abilities needed to successfully complete a programme; 6.2.4.3 Consider the potential for minimum criteria to unintentionally exclude groups of people; and 6.2.4.4 Consider the faculty’s diversity targets. 6.2.5 Due to the limited places available as well as strategic and purposeful enrolment management, not all undergraduate applicants who meet the minimum admission requirements of a particular programme are guaranteed admission. 6.2.6 Admission to register for undergraduate programmes is based on the final National Senior Certificate, Independent Examination Board or other legitimate school-leaving examination results. 6.2.7 SU requires prospective first-year students to complete the National Benchmark Tests (NBTs), with the exceptions indicated in faculties’ admission and selection guidelines. Faculties may use the NBTs for admission to undergraduate programmes, and in particular for decisions on student placement in extended degree programmes. 6.2.8 In addition to academic achievement, faculties may also consider applicable specified information, skills or agreements in addition to the academic admission requirements. This includes involvement and/or achievements in the field of leadership, community service, cultural activities, sports, multilingualism or part-time work; skills as demonstrated by, for example, portfolios or auditions; and faculty-specific contracts and agreements. 6.2.9 Faculties also determine minimum admission requirements for extended degree programmes (EDPs), which are to be published along with their admission requirements for mainstream programmes. 6.3 DETERMINING ENROLMENT TARGETS 6.3.1 The Council sets annual enrolment targets for faculties based on the size (total number of students) and shape (fields of study and diversity profile) of SU’s student body. 6.3.2 Based on these targets and institutional capacity, faculties annually determine the number of places available for each programme. 6.3.3 The diversity targets must be set after considering the following demographic indicators: 6.3.3.1 SU’s applicant pool for the past three years; 6.3.3.2 The students who pass the National Senior Certificate or Independent Examination Board matriculation examinations; 6.3.3.3 The demographic profiles of the student bodies of the University of Cape Town, the University of the Western Cape and the Cape Peninsula University of Technology; and 6.3.3.4 The demographic profile of 15-24 year-olds in the Western Cape Province. 6.3.4 Each year, the Rector’s Management Team, in consultation with faculties, determines diversity targets per faculty as part of the institutional enrolment management process. These targets are based on the University’s overall diversity targets. Deans with the support of the divisions for Prospective Students, Academic Administration and Institutional Research and Planning, are responsible for faculties’ achieving their enrolment and diversity targets. 6.3.5 Based on the faculty diversity targets, each faculty must determine the number of BCI and SES students it aspires to place in each programme (race and SES targets). These are not set maximum or minimum numbers, but guidelines for the admissions process. 6.3.6 In order to meet these race and SES targets, a determined number of places are made available for applicants based on their race or socio-economic status. 6.3.7 Each faculty must annually determine the number of available places in each programme. These available places are filled in the following order and based on: 6.3.7.1 Academic performance, irrespective of race and SES; 6.3.7.2 Race; and 6.3.7.3 Socio-economic status. 6.3.8 In making this determination, faculties must be guided by: 6.3.8.1 Historical application and registration trends; and 6.3.8.2 The faculty’s diversity targets. 6.4 ADMISSION PROCEDURE 6.4.1 As applications are received, applicants who meet the minimum academic criteria are ranked in descending order in accordance with their academic results at school and classified according to race (in accordance with para 6.5) and SES (in accordance with para 6.6). 6.4.2 Top achievers in all categories could receive an early admission offer. 6.4.3 The faculty admits the highest ranked applicants to fill the places assigned for academic achievement without regard to race or SES. 6.4.4 From the remaining applicants, the faculty admits the highest-ranked BCI applicants until the overall target of BCI students for the programme is met (if there are sufficient BCI applicants who meet the minimum requirements for admission). 6.4.5 From the remaining applicants, the faculty admits the highest-ranked applicants with an SES score of at least 4 or above until the overall target of SES students is met (if there are sufficient SES applicants who meet the minimum requirements for admission). 6.4.6 If there are places remaining because either (a) there were not enough BCI or SES applicants who meet the minimum requirements for admission to fill the assigned positions or (b) the programme achieved its race and SES targets without filling all the places assigned for BCI and SES students, then the remaining best performing applicants will be admitted without regard to race or SES status. 6.4.7 Those BCI and SES applicants who are not admitted to a mainstream programme, including applicants who do not meet the minimum requirements for admission, may be considered for admission to an Extended Degree Programme. 6.4.8 In highly exceptional cases, the dean may, in his or her discretion, admit students to a mainstream or Extended Degree Programme with a view to promoting diversity or compensating for socio-economic disadvantage. 6.4.9 The rector may also admit students, in his or her discretion, to a mainstream or Extended Degree Programme according to individual circumstances regarding each case. 6.5 RACE 6.5.1 This section only applies to South African citizens. 6.5.2 SU uses race in its admissions process for the following reasons: 6.5.2.1 To redress historical discrimination against Black African, Coloured and Indian persons. 6.5.2.2 As a result of this historical discrimination, race remains a strong indicator of ongoing disadvantage. 6.5.2.3 All students and staff benefit from a diverse student body that includes students from all races. 6.5.2.4 To comply with the reporting requirements set by the DHET. 6.5.3 In referring to the race of applicants, the University recognises that past racial discrimination in South Africa (through legislative means) translates into continuing disadvantage in the present. 6.5.4 The University’s intention is to deal with the continuing effects of racial classification under the racist and discriminatory laws of the apartheid state, which were recognized as a crime against humanity. 6.5.5 The University does not attempt to determine the race classification of applicants, but instead relies on a system of self-classification. 6.5.6 For the purposes of self-classification, all applicants are invited to indicate the racial group with which they most closely relate. Options will include those adopted by the apartheid regime namely “Black African”, “White”, “Coloured”, “Indian”, and will also include “Asian”, “I’d prefer not to say”, or “other (specified)”. 6.5.7 SU relies primarily on an applicant’s self-classification as a member of one of those racial categories. 6.5.8 If the applicant self-classifies as Black African, Coloured, Indian or Asian, he or she will be eligible for those places reserved for BCI applicants. 6.5.9 addition to self-classification, applicants will be asked to indicate whether one or both of their parents, or a guardian under whose care the applicant was raised, was racially classified by the Apartheid State? Options will include “yes”, “I don’t know and cannot find out”, “I’d prefer not to say”, and “My parent/s or guardian/s did not live in South Africa before 1991, and were not racially classified”. 6.5.10 If the answer is “yes” for either parent or a guardian, the applicant will be required to indicate whether his or her parents were classified as “Black African”, “Coloured”, “Indian” or “White” under apartheid legislation. Another option will be, “I don’t know and cannot find out”. 6.5.11 By referring to the apartheid legislation and racial classification under that system, the University does not in any manner condone that system, or seek to perpetuate the effects of racial classification under that system. The University does, however, recognise that for most applicants who grew up in South Africa, the reality is that one or both of their parents are likely to have been racially classified in the past. Furthermore, the University recognises that past discriminatory practices still generally correlate to present disadvantage, which must be addressed by corrective action. 6.5.12 If an applicant’s racial self-classification: (a) is inconsistent with the apartheid racial classification of either of his or her parents or guardian; (b) contradicts a reasonable perception of self-classification; or (c) seems to be an attempt to obtain access to SU’s redress regulations in an unjustifiable way, the University may, in its sole discretion: 6.5.12.1 Inform the applicant that it is questioning his or her self-classification and allow him or her an opportunity to make representations; 6.5.12.2 Having considered those representations: 6.5.12.2.1 If it is satisfied that the self-classification is reasonable, apply that self-classification. 6.5.12.2.2 If the student acted dishonestly, refuse to admit the student; or 6.5.12.2.3 If the student did not act dishonestly, but if the University believes the self-classification is mistaken, disregard the applicant’s self-classification. 6.6 SOCIO-ECONOMIC STATUS (SES) 6.6.1 In addition to addressing historical and present disadvantage by considering applicants’ race, SU also considers applicants’ socio-economic status (SES). SES is a reflection of the current socio-economic disadvantages an applicant has had to overcome. Considering SES allows SU to: 6.6.1.1 Redress current socio-economic disadvantage; and 6.6.1.2 Account for the reduced performance caused solely by lower socio-economic conditions. 6.6.2 SU calculates a factor by considering three indicators: - educational disadvantage; - economic disadvantage; and - first-generation student status. 6.6.3 Together, these indicators produce a score between 0 and 10. An applicant who scores at least 4 is regarded as a socio-economically disadvantaged applicant (SDA). 6.6.4 Educational disadvantage: 6.6.4.1 Educational disadvantage refers to inadequate access to quality education, which has resulted in insufficient opportunities to develop academic potential. It is closely linked to poor provision of favourable teaching conditions and facilities, quality teachers and education leaders, well-situated schools as well as support from parents and the community at large. 6.6.4.2 A maximum of 4 points can be assigned for educational disadvantage. 6.6.4.3 SU relies on two alternative factors to determine educational disadvantage: a. Quintile classification - The Department of Basic Education includes each High School in a “quintile” based on the financial need in the area in which the school is situated, as well as a number of infrastructural indicators per school. - Quintiles 1 to 3 are regarded as disadvantaged schools. Quintile 5 represents advantaged schools. Quintile 4 schools constitute a middle band, such as schools with reasonable facilities but a remote location. - An applicant will receive: o 4 points: Quintile 1-3 school; o 2 points: Quintile 4 school; and o 0 points: Quintile 5 school. b. School fees - As an alternative to relying on the quintile of the school, educational disadvantage can be determined by considering the average, annual school fees. Fees offer a broad indication of the socio-economic status of a school. - Points are assigned as follows: o 4 points: R0 – R1 500; o 2 points: R1 500 – R5 000; and o 0 Points: R5 000 and higher. - School fees classification categories are subject to change and the rector’s management team may review the categories annually, if needed. 6.6.5 Economic disadvantage: 6.6.5.1 For purposes of granting higher education access to learners with strong academic potential but poor socio-economic circumstances, whose low financial status serves as primary impediment to admission. 6.6.5.2 A maximum of four points can be assigned for economic disadvantage, based on two factors: - 2 points: Applicant’s family received a state pension or child grant; and - 2 points: Applicant received financial assistance/exemption from school fees. 6.6.6 First-generation student status: 6.6.6.1 First generation applicants are defined as any applicant for whom none of the parent(s)/guardian(s) have a higher education qualification. 6.6.6.2 Points are assigned as follows: - 2 points: Highest qualification of parents/guardian is Grade 12 or lower; - 1 point: Highest qualification of parents/guardian is a certificate or diploma; and - 0 points: Highest qualification of parents/guardian is a university degree. 6.6.7 Summary: In summary, SES is calculated according to the following table (Table 2): Educational Disadvantage Quintile 1-3 OR < R1 500 fees 4 points Quintile 4 OR R1500-R5 000 fees 2 points Quintile 5 AND >R5000 fees 0 points Economic Disadvantage State pension or child grant 2 points Financial assistance at school 2 points First Generation Status Highest qualification of parents/guardian Grade 12 or lower 2 points Highest qualification of parents/guardian certificate or diploma 1 point Highest qualification of parents/guardian university degree 0 points  TOTAL /10 6.7 EXTENDED DEGREE PROGRAMMES 6.7.1 Faculties may offer Extended Degree Programmes, in order to accommodate BCI and SES students who have the potential for success but: (a) were not admitted to the mainstream programme; and (b) would benefit from an additional period to complete the programme of study. 6.7.2 If an EDP is available, all BCI and SES students who are not admitted to the mainstream programme, including applicants who do not meet the minimum requirements for admission, will be considered for admission to the EDP based solely on academic merit. 6.8 NO UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION 6.8.1 SU does not unfairly discriminate in its admissions process. 6.8.2 In particular, it does not discriminate against applicants based on: 6.8.2.1 Sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation; and 6.8.2.2 Religious convictions 6.9 STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL LEARNING NEEDS (DISABILITIES) 6.9.1 The University acknowledges the interaction between this Admissions Policy and the Policy regarding Students with Special Learning Needs/Disabilities. 6.9.2 In terms of the Policy regarding Students with Special Learning Needs, SU defines ‘disabilities’ as demonstrable physical, non-visible and/or psychological limitations that negatively affect a person’s daily activities in a specific way. 6.9.3 The University would not want a person’s disability to serve as an impediment to admission. Therefore, as far as is feasible, the University supports persons with special learning needs (disabilities) in their claim to be admitted, having regard to the set academic programme requirements (including programme outcomes) as well as professional requirements. 6.9.4 The applicant remains responsible to provide sufficient information on the nature of his or her special learning need and/or disability in the application for admission. 6.10 SCARCE SKILLS 6.10.1 In implementing the Admissions Policy, SU - being a public higher education institution - acknowledges its responsibility to train students in the so-called scarce-skills areas and associated professions. 6.10.2 This refers to areas where a shortage of experts in certain academic fields and geographic locations may have a severely negative impact on the education, health, infrastructure and economic prosperity of communities in South Africa. 6.11 PRIOR LEARNING EXPERIENCE The assessment and recognition of prior learning as an admission criterion is contained in SU’s Policy for the Assessment and Recognition of Prior Learning (ARPL). The latter policy is informed by this Admissions Policy. 6.12 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 6.12.1 The internationalisation of higher education makes a significant contribution to the establishment of a diverse student community. 6.12.2 SU welcomes national applicants who passed internationally recognised equivalents of the NSC matric examination that Universities South Africa (USAF) also recognizes. 6.12.3 The admission and selection of international students occur based on academic merit. 6.12.4 The admission and selection of national applicants who hold international matric equivalents, such as the Cambridge International Examinations, are however still subject to the provisions of this policy. 6.13 ADMISSION AND LANGUAGE 6.13.1 With its Language Policy SU has committed itself to the promotion of multilingualism, and follows a dynamic process to make the University more inclusive and more diverse. 6.13.2 In accordance with the Language Policy, languages of instruction must facilitate the broadening of access and academic success. 6.14 STUDENTS WITH CRIMINAL RECORDS 6.14.1 SU requires that applicants declare a criminal record, should it exist. 6.14.2 SU will consider the nature of the criminal record and may, in its discretion, refuse admission as a result. 6.15 STUDENT ACCESS WITH SUCCESS 6.15.1 To ensure equitable access and an equal chance of success, the University provides a range of pre-university support services such as interventions in schools with the aim to prepare learners for higher education, career advice, and the availability financial support and on-campus accommodation. 6.15.2 Once students enrol, additional enablers for success are offered by student support services such as the divisions for Student Affairs, and Learning and Teaching Enhancement, as well as by faculties, as far as available resources permit. 7. POLICY CONTROL 7.1 Governance structure governing this policy: The policy is determined by the University Council after consultation with Senate. The Rector is responsible for executing the policy, and delegates overall responsibility to the applicable environments, who report to a member of the Rector’s Management Team, namely the Vice-Rector (Learning and Teaching). 7.2 Ownership: In this regard, the Rector appoints the Vice-Rector (Learning and Teaching) as line principal and owner of this policy. 7.3 Roles and responsibilities: The University has established, amongst others, the following roles and responsibilities with a view to dealing with and managing this policy: 7.3.1 The Vice-Rector (Learning and Teaching) should, whenever he or she considers it necessary, initiate the reviewing of the Admissions Policy and oversee the process, in particular where possible adjustments or replacement is required. He or she fulfils the overall overview function of implementing and updating this policy. 7.3.2 The Senior Director (Prospective Students), being the curator is ultimately responsible for the interpretation and implementation of the policy. From time to time, the curator in consultation with the Vice-Rector (Learning and Teaching) convenes a task team to review the policy. 7.3.3 Deans are responsible for drafting admission and selection guidelines in line with this Admissions Policy. 7.3.4 The Registrar fulfils an administrative function with regard to the implementation of faculties’ admission and selection guidelines in line with the policy. 7.4 Implementation: At the commencement of an application cycle, no more than two years following approval by Council. Principles of the Admissions Policy take effect immediately following approval by Council. 7.5 Review: This policy shall be reviewed every five years, or as needed. 8. MONITORING AND REPORTING Monitoring is embedded in normal management practices, and communication occurs via the regular communication channels of the University. Accountability and responsibility for establishing the required controls for policy monitoring and reporting, as well as for continuous reporting to the Rector’s Management Team, are allocated to the policy owner and curator respectively. The Vice-Rector (Learning and Teaching) reports the result of undergraduate and postgraduate enrolments to the SU Council once per year. 9. ACTION IN THE EVENT OF NON-COMPLIANCE Any complaints arising from alleged non-compliance with the policy are addressed in terms of the University’s existing complaints management processes and systems in respect of admission, as determined by the curator of this policy. 10. DEFINITIONS In this policy, the terms below are assigned the following meanings in the context of admission: In this policy, the terms below are assigned the following meanings in the context of admission: 10.1 Diversity – In the context of this Admissions Policy, factors such as racial classification, gender, disability, socio-economic disadvantage (educational and/or economic disadvantage and first-generation status), geographic location (rural vs. urban) and age 10.2 Equality of rights – Allocating the same rights to people or groups 10.3 Equity and fairness – Equitable, fair or rightful opportunities to enter higher education and achieve success 10.4 Potential to succeed – Students who, having regard to their context, display exceptional potential to succeed as indicated by their school achievements and NBT- results. 10.5 First-generation status – Being the status of applicants who have not had the benefit of parents with a tertiary education 10.6 Inclusivity – Not to exclude on the grounds of race, class, origin, gender, sexuality and disability 10.7 Reasonableness – Applying socially acceptable and equitable principles 10.8 Redress – In the context of the Admissions Policy, rectifying past inequalities 10.9 Racial self-classification – When an applicant personally volunteers information in respect of race, based on own judgement 10.10 Transparency – Openness in intention, communication and actions 10.11 Undergraduate and postgraduate programmes – Accredited academic programmes registered with the DHET 10.12 Disadvantage factor – A formula that attaches a specific weight value to particular indicators of disadvantage 11. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS 11.1 Institutional Intent and Strategy (2013-2018), supported by the SU Institutional Plan (2014-2018) 11.2 The Calendar of SU 11.3 Institutional Rationale, Principles and Procedure for Enrolment Management (as approved by Council on 3 May 2011) 11.4 Policy with regard to students with Special Learning Needs/Disabilities 11.5 Policy for the Assessment and Recognition of Prior Learning (ARPL) 11.6 Guidelines regarding SU’s Extended Degree Programmes (with additions as approved by Senate on 18 March 2011) 11.7 Faculty-specific admission and selection guidelines 11.8 Ministerial documents a. Higher Education Act 101 of 1997 b. South African Constitution c. DHET’s published statutory admission requirements d. White Paper for Post-School Education and Training – 20 November 2013 e. White Paper 3: A Programme for the Transformation of Higher Education – July 1997 f. DHET’s Draft Social Inclusion Policy Framework – August 2014 g. Ministerial guidelines for DHET enrolment targets 12. RELATED DOCUMENTS 12.1 Language Policy 12.2 Policy for Placement in Residences, and in Listening, Learning and Living Houses, as well as Allocation to PSO Wards and Clusters 12.3 Policy in respect of the presentation of short courses at Stellenbosch University 12.4 Strategic Framework for Sport at Stellenbosch University 2014-2018 12.5 Rules with regard to readmission ADDENDUM A  Source: Stellenbosch University